These Tory Stories podcasts aim to act as
counters to the universal Whig version of
history, observing history and the world
from the viewpoint of an 18th Century Tory.
Their focus will be on the Industrial
Revolution and the Tory achievements of
1660-1832.
Tory Story VI – Why the Stuart Restoration
Gave Us the Industrial Revolution
Britain's Industrial
Revolution, lifting the living standards
and transformed the lives of everybody
today, and as I have discussed that process
began in the late 1760s, in the early years
of George III.
By that stage, however, it was clear to
everybody that Britain’s society and
economy were different from all other
countries and that revolutionary change
might well happen there.
Today I am going to look at the process of
making Britain different from other West
European countries, which mostly happened
about a century earlier, with the
Restoration of 1660 and the succeeding
years until the 1688 Revolution.
I want to discuss in this podcast what made
the Restoration period so special and what
changes made Britain’s path deviate from
that of other countries.
Three things had already begun to
differentiate Britain
before the English Civil War broke out in
1642: Francis Bacon’s Scientific Method,
the beginnings in the Great Tew circle of
what later became Toryism and the immense
movement of peoples across the Atlantic, to
colonize the American mainland and the West
Indies.
The Scientific Method was propounded by
Bacon in his 1620 Novum Organum
Scientiarum, although other thinkers in
several countries had got close to it.
It showed practical technologists how they
could perfect their machines using an
iterative method of practical
experimentation refined by theoretical
reasoning, leading to further practical
experimentation. This powerful methodology
produced more sustained advances than had
previously been possible and provided an
intellectual paradigm that would prove key
to the Industrial Revolution.
Western European countries other than
Britain had equal access to Bacon’s
treatise (which was written in Latin and
published in the Netherlands).
They also had access to the research other
great scientists of the time, only a
minority of whom were British.
But it was Britain where the Scientific
Method took hold most firmly, and where the
Restoration’s Royal Society gave scientific
progress a central place in society.
The French, in contrast, were before 1789 a
bunch of dilettante theoreticians, trying
to get Leonhard Euler to figure out fluid
mechanics so their Navy could move faster,
ignoring the weed on the bottom of the
ships.
The Great Tew circle was a group of mostly
young gentry intellectuals led by Lucius
Cary, 2nd Viscount Falkland, who met at his
house in Great Tew, Oxfordshire.
It included several people who would be
important after the Restoration, including
Edward Hyde, later Earl of Clarendon and
the architect of the Restoration
settlement.
They opposed the absolutist rule of Charles
I and Strafford
and the narrow quasi-Catholic
Anglicanism of Archbishop William Laud
but remained staunchly
committed both to the Church
of England and the King
as leader of the country.
They differed from time to time on religion
and other matters, but consciously took the
view of Cicero and Erasmus that such
differences should not mar an underlying
friendship and might lead to truth.
Economics was peripheral to the Great Tew
group (although their limited economic
ideas were to have lasting influence), but
they strongly opposed the royal monopolies
that hampered the economy under the early
Stuarts and supported freedom of domestic
trade. Since Great Tew’s thinkers objected
to the state-imposed restrictions of the
Tudor and early Stuart monarchy, they were
pro-trade, at least domestically, and
wanted to remove the remaining feudal
restrictions on property transfer.
Clarendon would develop these ideas during
his time as Lord Chancellor.
Overall, Great Tew was the birthplace of
what I have called the Oxfordshire School
of Economic Thought, pre-dating Adam Smith
in its enthusiasm for free markets but
without his enthusiasm for unilateral
tariff abolition – I shall come back later
to that school’s leader, Sir Dudley North.
The East India Company had already
established a foothold in India before
1642, but Britain’s North American and
Caribbean expansion was on an altogether
different scale.
Jamestown was colonized in 1607, with the
addition of the first African slaves in
1619. Plymouth was colonized in 1620.
More significantly, a very well-backed
settlement was
established at Boston in
1630, including the first American college,
Harvard, founded in 1636.
By 1650, the settler population of the
future United States was over 50,000,
including about 400 African-Americans in
Virginia, of whom 18,000 were in
Massachusetts and 19,000 were in Virginia.
There was especially rapid expansion of the
North American settler population in the
1640s, when disgruntled Cavaliers fled from
the authoritarian Puritan regime emerging
at home.
The colonies’ main export was tobacco from
Virginia -- with under 400 slaves there
before 1650, the main workforce was
indentured servants from British convicts
and the impoverished.
In the West Indies, Bermuda was colonized
from 1612 and Barbados from 1627, exporting
sugar from the 1640s.
Again, the primary workforce was British
and Irish indentured servants, although a
British workforce did not do well in the
Caribbean climate.
With the Bahamas also colonized in the
1640s, the total population of the British
West Indies was over 40,000 by 1650.
Although the revenues from North America
and the Caribbean were modest before 1650,
the level of investment and manpower there
was already huge.
The growth in population of Britain’s
transatlantic colonies to almost 100,000
gave them a potential importance far
greater than contemporary British
investment in India, and greater than the
Dutch had achieved despite their huge
investment in their East and West India
Companies. Britain’s transatlantic
population also dwarfed that of France,
which in 1650 was only around 2,000 in
Canada and 5,000 in the Caribbean.
The Interregnum from 1649 opened up the
British political system to new groups
beyond the Court aristocracy.
Ministers from working-class or
middle-class backgrounds had existed before
– Thomas Wolsey and Thomas Cromwell were
both humbly born – but the political
system’s openness to new talent became
general, rather than limited to a monarch’s
accidental favourites.
The Interregnum also introduced Dutch ideas
about secure property rights.
Property rights are the central pillar of a
free society and essential to a functioning
economy – without them no fortune is safe,
nothing can be built up except by the
shabbiest short-term speculation, and
long-term creation of a substantial
business becomes impossible.
Their importance had been recognized by
Great Tew, but the Interregnum rulers had
the first chance of putting this innovation
into practice, albeit imperfectly.
Property rights under the Tudors and early
Stuarts were more secure than they had been
– in the Middle Ages any local lord with a
band of thugs could dispossess you – but
they were still subject to the whims of the
monarch – as the monastic orders discovered
under Henry VIII.
The Dutch beginning around 1580 were the
first in Europe to discover that secure
property rights made all kinds of new
enterprises possible and made themselves
rich with this discovery.
In the Interregnum, Britain finally learned
the same overwhelmingly important lesson,
and after 1660 it was codified into law and
became the centrepiece of British
commercial wealth and eventually industrial
growth. Thomas Newcomen could not have
spent the ten years 1702-12 and a large
portion of his income as an ironmonger in
perfecting his steam engine, if he had not
been confident that his ironmongery would
be secure and his invention would be
protected, albeit under Thomas Savery’s
already existing patent.
The other legacy of the Interregnum was the
Navigation Act of 1651, some version of
which was in force for the next 200 years,
until final repeal in 1849.
This followed the principles of Thomas Mun,
of whom more below, by banning foreign
ships from transporting goods from Asia,
Africa or America to England or its
colonies. Only ships with an English owner,
master and a majority English crew were
acceptable. It allowed European ships to
ship their own country’s products to
Britain but banned shipment to England in
European ships of any goods from a third
European country.
It was aimed primarily at the Dutch and
essentially banned Dutch ships from
shipping goods to England, since there were
few goods produced in the Netherlands that
were competitive in the English market).
In 1660, King Charles II returned,
accompanied by Clarendon as Lord Chancellor
In their first summer, the Convention
Parliament passed legislation that would be
absolutely crucial to the future Industrial
Revolution: the Tenures Abolition Act,
1660.
This abolished the Court of Wards and
Liveries, abolished tenancies in capite and
by knights-service, and purveyance.
By doing so, it eliminated many feudal dues
and service obligations that had been due
to the Crown.
Most important, it eliminated the feudal
restrictions on land holding, making land
an asset that could be freely bought, sold
and mortgaged.
Thereby, it freed up enormous amounts of
capital that could be used to finance
industrialization. By creating a free
market in land, it gave Britain an
advantage that other European countries all
lacked, even a century later.
The free market in land, when combined with
the local country banks that grew up after
1750, played a crucial role in getting the
first industrializations off the ground –
the country banks could grant mortgages on
the land of local farmers and gentry, thus
making capital available for new industrial
projects.
Section 14 of this Act also imposed an
excise duty
on tea, coffee, sherbet and chocolate. By
shifting state revenues to these new
sources, Clarendon performed a vital
service for the country’s fiscal future.
Instead of being fixed like previous taxes,
customs and excise duties on these newly
consumed products (as well as on tobacco
and sugar, produced in Britain’s American
and West Indian colonies) increased with
the increase in national wealth, trade,
“luxury” and consumption of these expensive
imported goods.
These new revenues formed the basis of
Britain’s taxation system until the 1840s;
by 1792 customs and excise duties were
producing 69% of Britain’s revenue of £18.7
million, itself some 15 times the revenue
in 1661 (in pounds whose value had changed
little).
The Restoration saw a huge expansion of
British trade, with corresponding benefit
to the Exchequer.
A newly aggressive approach to
international trade was accompanied by a
sharp expansion and professionalization of
the Royal Navy led by Charles
II and hist brother James.
It was in this period that Britain became a
leader in world trade, with military
resources to back it.
Sugar and tobacco were now produced in
British colonies in the West Indies and
America. Sugar used slave labour, because
the West Indies climate was intolerable to
the light-skinned British.
However, tobacco used very few slaves until
around 1690, relying instead on indentured
servants shipped over from British jails.
The revenue effect of these two products
was huge.
Tobacco was already producing excise duties
of £100,000 a year, 10% of total budget
revenues, by the time of Bacon’s Rebellion
in 1676, while sugar went on growing
through the 18th century so that its duties
were a fifth of greatly enlarged total
budget revenue by 1792.
These new revenues made national budgeting
easier; after the Great Stop of the
Exchequer in 1672 the Treasury ran
surpluses overall in the next 15 years of
peace – only after 1688 with William III’s
expensive wars did the National Debt become
necessary.
Coffee, tea and chocolate also began to be
imported into Britain in quantity in the
Restoration period.
These products were not produced in British
colonies (tea was Chinese, not Indian) and
so did not produce huge excise revenues
(the East India Company’s surplus of tea in
1773 was a cause of the notorious Boston
Tea Party).
However, coffee had a big cultural effect
starting in the Restoration period, by
spawning coffee houses where conversation
and deal-making mixed.
Jonathan’s, founded in 1680, became the
Stock Exchange; Lloyd’s, founded in 1686
became the world’s insurance market and
Garraway’s founded in 1657 introduced tea
to Britain and then became a leading
commodities exchange, holding the Hudson
Bay Company’s first sale of furs in 1671.
(The Hudson’s Bay Company, founded in 1670
by the King’s cousin Prince Rupert of the
Rhine, at one point owned 1.5 million
square miles of Canada, and still exists as
a retail chain.)
Next, the Restoration period marked the
birth of banking.
Before 1660, banking services had been
carried out by two groups: goldsmiths and
scriveners. Goldsmiths acted as
depositories for gold and silver, forming
it into tableware as desired and lending
against gold or silver tableware and other
artefacts deposited with them.
Because they dealt in such luxury items,
their clientele was largely limited to the
very rich, especially Londoners.
Scriveners were drafters (and, before the
invention of printing, writers) of
documents, with skill in legal wording but
without the specialized legal practice of
attorneys. They became specialists in land
transactions and documents, having contacts
at the Mayor’s Court in London where titles
could be checked.
They had a good period in the early 17th
century because of a high volume of land
transfers – the poet John Milton’s father
was a scrivener and rich enough to keep
Milton comfortably until his death –
writing poems about Paradise was not very
lucrative, earning Milton only £30 for
several years’ work.
Scriveners’ clients were mostly country
landowners, but not the very rich – money
transfers to London were sent with a sheep
drover bringing his flock to London – sheep
drovers, travelling in groups and with
sheepdogs, were pretty safe from
highwaymen.
After 1660, both groups began to move into
true banking, though goldsmiths were
knocked back by the 1672 Great Stop of the
Exchequer (scriveners, without many Court
contacts, did not lend much to government).
Goldsmith banks included Hoare’s founded in
1672, Child’s founded in 1671 and a little
later Coutts, founded in 1692.
The biggest scrivener bank was Clayton &
Morris, which grew out of a scrivening
business and became a bank from 1658,
beginning by lending money to Royalist
plotters, notably George Monck, who
restored the King with his Coldstream
Guards and became Duke of Albemarle.
Clayton & Morris built a nationwide deposit
and mortgage business, their largest client
being the hugely landed but heavily
indebted 2nd Duke of Buckingham.
While Clayton & Morris did not survive Sir
Robert Clayton’s death in 1707, with its
mortgage lending, deposit taking and
primarily rural gentry clientele it set the
pattern for the country banks of the next
century.
The Restoration period was fertile with
economists, a discipline that had few
previous adherents.
These anticipated much of Adam Smith’s
thinking by a century.
Thomas Mun’s mercantilist classic
“England’s Treasure by Forraign Trade” is
something of a cheat, having been written
in the 1620s, but it was first published in
1664 and was highly influential on
Restoration economic thinking.
Mun was a Director of the early East India
Company; his thesis was that trade should
be organized to store up “Treasure” – gold
and silver – thus making the state powerful
and happy.
This was a very sensible approach in the
17th century, when monarchs were
chronically short of cash and the cost of
warfare had escalated.
It was realized through the trades in
tobacco, sugar, coffee, tea and chocolate,
as I mentioned before.
Its success made the last years of the
Restoration period fiscally much happier
than the early years, let alone the
cash-starved monarchy of James I and
Charles I – it also provided the money to
build up the Navy.
Sir William Petty made his fortune
surveying Ireland for the Cromwellian
clearances, acquiring a substantial fortune
thereby. After the Restoration, he helped
found the Royal Society, then retired to
his new Irish estates and pondered on
economics. His “Political Arithmetic”
written in 1676 but published in 1690,
pioneered the collection of economic
statistics, developing the first national
income accounts.
He also pioneered the doctrine of
laissez-faire, postulating that the economy
develops best when government meddles
least.
Sir Dudley North was the younger son of an
impoverished Royalist peer, who spent 20
years in Turkey making a fortune as a
merchant. He returned to England in 1680,
entered Parliament as a Tory and was
Chairman of Ways and Means in the 1685
Parliament, where he stamped out several
frauds in the Revenue and warned against
excessive money printing.
His 1691 “Discourses upon Trade” published
after his death but containing ideas from
his period of political power, anticipated
Smith and Cantillon in its enthusiasm for
free trade and warned against government
regulation: “Thus we may labour to hedge in
the Cuckow, but in vain; for no People ever
yet grew rich by Policies, but it is Peace,
Industry and Freedom that brings Trade and
Wealth, and nothing else.”
Mun solved the principal problem of 17th
century governments, but the
future-oriented Petty and North pointed the
economic way ahead clearly.
Their insights set the policy framework
that made the Industrial Revolution
possible.
The Restoration period also saw the birth
of political parties.
Their names emerged from the 1678-81
Exclusion Crisis, but their ideas predated
that crisis.
The Whig party was the natural home for
supporters of the Commonwealth, though it
was broader than that.
Its primary base was the high landed
aristocracy, who resented Royal power,
together with the cosmopolitan City of
London, home of the goldsmith-bankers who
propped up the Whig aristocrats’ fortunes.
Before 1800 the Whigs were highly
protectionist, passing the Trade with
France Act 1678, prohibiting such trade
even though Britain was at peace with
France (they were to continue such
protectionism under Walpole).
The “Whig Martyrs” of 1683, who attempted
to assassinate the King, included one high
aristocrat, William Russell whose brother
I think became the
Duke of Bedford and a
Commonwealth-supporting agitator and
polemicist, Algernon Sidney; they were
sentenced to death by a jury chosen by Sir
Dudley North.
Since the goldsmith-bankers did not finance
industry, the Whig party was devoted to
wars, Imperial exploitation and slavery;
they were generally opposed to the forces
that produced the Industrial Revolution.
To be fair, the Whig hostility to monarchy
did produce one liberating result: the
Habeas Corpus Act of 1678, observed more
rigorously in its early years than it is
today.
The Tory party grew out of Clarendon’s
Restoration Settlement; his second son
Laurence Hyde, Earl of Rochester was its
main founder.
It represented the great rural mass of the
country, devoted to the monarchy and the
Church of England.
Tories favoured free trade, being
influenced by Sir Dudley North and also
peace and low taxes, since their members
paid most of the taxes without having the
liquid means of the Whig high aristocracy
or the “monied interest” of the City of
London While the goldsmith-bankers were
Whig, the scrivener-bankers and their
eventual successors the country banks were
mostly Tory, since their business was based
on land and local knowledge, not money
market dealing.
With its openness to global trade and its
localization, the Tory party was well
suited to assist in the birth of
industrialization, from the Devon
ironmonger Thomas Newcomen onwards.
The final innovation of the Restoration
period and perhaps the most important for
Britain’s long-term future, was the
founding of the Royal Society in 1662.
This propagated Bacon’s Scientific Method,
making it a paradigm that innovators of
whatever educational level could use in
developing and improving their machines.
In the Restoration period it also produced
a stellar collection of scientists and
other intellects: Robert Boyle, Christopher
Wren, Robert Hooke, John Flamsteed, Edmond
Halley and most important Isaac Newton, who
between them revolutionized science and
made Britain a leading scientific power for
the next three centuries.
The Society’s alumni’s scientific
discoveries themselves stimulated
industrialization; they also had an effect
in industrialization’s more practical
needs. For example, Thomas Tompion, a
protégé of Hooke, was Britain’s leading
clock maker of the period, greatly
improving engineering tolerances in metal
machinery, a skill that would be vital to
future industrial progress.
Intellectually, economically and
politically, the Restoration period was
essential to producing the Industrial
Revolution. During this period that Britain
became different from every other European
economy, with better property rights, freer
domestic trade and superior scientific
education. These differences led to faster
economic growth and eventually, to changes
never before seen in the history of the
world. Charles II and the Earl of
Clarendon, the Restoration period’s
founders, deserve our utmost gratitude and
recognition.
Thank you very much for listening.
That is the end of Tory
Stories Podcast No. 6